---
date: 2022-03-07
---
The Faust is definitely becoming more complete, but the Baikens continue to kill my vibe. This set from today really shows off my strengths and weaknesses. The first 3 games, even though I lost one, I felt pretty good about. But the final three really displayed my weaknesses.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/9cGDjWdT19M" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Observations
* i need to use 2S more in situations where the opponent is above me. Relatedly...
* i'm way to reliant on 6P. I was whiffing it in my opponent's face anticipating an attack. Which relates to...
* I play very passive when I'm itemless. I need to become more comfortable using my pokes to gain advantage in neutral
* i'm leaving opportunities on the table, either for damage or items, such as: whiffing Thrust off hits when I should Item Toss, dropping corner combos and wallsplats, other dropped combos, messing up my inputs for item super or just forgetting to do it, never using Bone Crush...
* in general, my use of aerials are off. I whiffed jK>jD on afro'd Baiken twice, and I missed an airdash>jS that got me punished. Plus whiffing other aerials while trying to escape pressure and not being comfortable with safejumps... I'm just not familiar that part of toolkit yet.
* not using Scarecrow RC when I'm in a tight spot

This set also showed the need to adapt and have a variety of ways to respond to tough situations. I had just labbed using j2K as an answer to Baiken pressure, but that was getting blown up later in the set by jS. I needed to have other options to cycle through.