---
date: 2022-03-06
---
The last month has been all school work all the time, so no GG at all. On spring break now so I can hop back on the sticks for a bit. Played a some Faust in the tower yesterday and slowly getting back in the groove.

Baiken has been the bane of my existence. I have no idea how to keep her out or push her out. Her jS and 2H are huge and terrifying, I have no idea when to challenge or try to escape her pressure, I haven't tested any of her rope shenanigans. Lots to figure out there, but luckily the tower is crawling with Baikens. Check out the tape.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/QvksuC2rNBo" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/egFsmF6XBdU" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Honestly, her pressure was on my mind a lot after playing as this force I can't deal with, but there were so many other things I was doing wrong before Baiken got in that I need to work on too. Reviewing tape is so good, I rarely see what I expect to see.

Few things I want to lab today:

- when to use alternate Faust anti-airs, 2S and 2K. 6P was not coming through sometimes
- when to challenge/escape Baiken's pressure, including rope stuff
- practice not autopiloting item toss in bad situations. I was getting punished a lot for point blank items after block strings
- placing my j2Ks more intelligently
- testing air-to-air possibilities, esp. jK
- just not 5K-ing, almost ever, goddamn

Long term, I need to also practice setplay with item toss. Like, what even is my desired outcome after I land a 2K>2D>Item Toss? What items should I use to keep pressuring, when to back off, when to toss more items? Relatedly, remembering to use my Item super more is essential for maximizing meter use.

Still really liking Faust though, even as I'm struggling. Excited to figure this character out.
