---
date: 2024-01-04
---
I had a long, fun session against a Peach on unranked last night. I would love more exposure to this matchup. It's tricky, but I think Doc has some cool things he can do in this matchup re: edgeguarding, comboing off b-airs, fighting the projectile game with pills and cape, and capitalizing on grabs.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/M4uTpGhUmQI" title="Long Peach Session (SSBM) [2024-01-03]" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

The games started in my favor, but I got overwhelmed by the end. Some of it was basic dumb panic options out of disadvantage - I needed to mix up my recovery options instead of just jumping and pilling or d-airing ever time, I was getting hard called out several times. My ledge options in general need to be cleaner as usual, the Peach was getting away with some fraudulent ledge pressure since I wasn't consistently using galint to force her away.

Even more critically, I felt unable to reliably capitalize on openings because she was constantly mashing A out of disadvantage, which turned into jabs or n-airs that stuffed my moves. Successful jabs or b-airs or up-airs regularly turned into trades or reversals.

I labbed the jab and grab scenarios a bit. Off a single jab, I should be able to consistently get a grab or down-smash. Off double jab, if they try to n-air, shield into grab or OOS up-smash is strong. And triple jab can win out if the spacing is close. This is all complicated by CC down-smash, which this Peach actually didn't do much, but is always a threat. Basically, using shield options to extend pressure is key. Ideally that discourages them from mashing eventually, which opens up more straight-forward options. 

Otherwise, I need to be less reliant to cape when pressuring the edge, it was very inconsistent even though it worked out a few times. I also need to figure out more reliable ways to win neutral, I was losing a lot clashes where her n-air or f-air cleanly beat my b-air or d-air. As usual, I need to be more aware of the threat range of dash attacks. And I need to practice grab conversions into f-air.
