---
layout: post
title: "Thinking About Walking Simulators"
subtitle: Part 0 of x in a series on Walking Simulators
date:   2020-03-26 12:00:00 -0500
categories: game walking-sim intro
---

What is a walking simulator?

The past decade, roughly, has seen the emergence of a latent video game genre - the walking simulator. 

I might have said the more typical phrase, "the birth of a new genre," but that's not really accurate in this case. Many videogames burst onto the mainstream as fully featured titles, quickly finding a fan base and inspiring similar works. DOOM in 1993 was clear case of this, arriving with exciting new gameplay and exciting new rendering technology to support it. "DOOM-clone" was the name for id Software's many imitators, before first-person shooter became the preferred term. More recently, Demon's Souls in 2009 and its more popular successor Dark Souls in 2011, quickly gathered a fervent fanbase and large catalogue of copycats, commonly dubbed "Souls-likes". Like everything does, even these games that landed in the videogame community with a shockwave had predecessors - id Software and many other developers had been working on realtime 3D rendering software for years before DOOM, and the From Software was hardly the first developer to create a difficult action-RPG. Still, the distinctive vision these games put forth quickly codified a new type of game, and the many similar titles that followed them can easily be traced back to those original flashpoints.

Though other game genres are not as clear cut as these two examples, it is usually fairly easy to describe key features of any given genre and single out a handful of games as clear examples and seminal works. The platformer genre, for instance, can be traced to the early 80s, with important prototypical works like Donkey Kong (1981) and Pitfall (1982). These early games established the basic premise of the genre, that of moving from one point on the screen to another while avoiding dangerous obstacles with your running and jumping abilities. Super Mario Bros. (1985) progressed the genre with smooth side-scrolling and level variety. Games like Mega Man (1987) and Contra (1987) elaborated on the genre's concept by adding projectile combat. 16-bit games like Sonic the Hedgehog (1991) and Donkey Kong Country (1994) created more complex and naturalistic level geometry for players to negotiate. Jumping Flash (1995), and then Super Mario 64 (1996) and Crash Bandicoot (1996), translated the core tenets of the genre into three dimensions. I'll spare you from reading through a full chronology, but it is fairly straight forward to continue this thinking through to the present and see how recent games like Super Mario Odyssey (2017) and Celeste (2018) fit neatly into the genre boundaries established decades prior and iterated upon in the years since. Every game you could list will surely have its own quirks and twists on the genre's core mechanics, often times fusing it with other genres to create hybrids like puzzle-platformer or roguelike-platformer, but the influences are still clear and uncomplicated.

This is not the same with the walking simulator. While the moniker has been applied to an increasing number of games over the past several years, and a loose canon of important works have come to define the genre, the origins are somewhat murky. Several of the earliest examples of the genre are not full games, but mods of existing works made by independent developers, often distributed for free. Dear Esther (2008), one of the most significant works in the genre's history,began as a Half-Life 2 mod. The Stanley Parable (2011) was the same. Gravity Bone (2008) was built off a modified version of the Quake II engine. It took several years before the ideas explored in these mods manifested in commercially released games, notably happening with Gone Home (2013), a high profile example of the genre drawing mainstream attention and success. This is what I mean when I say that the genre emerged from a latent state - small mods explored the core ideas of the genre, before indie studios began trickling those ideas out into the mainstream.

And what are the core ideas the genre is exploring? Again, it is tricky to say, as walking simulators are defined less by what they are, and more by what they are not. Many walking sims are attempting to adapt ideas from popular mainstream games, and they do so by stripping out everything but the nucleus of gameplay the developers find interesting. Again - these ideas were latent within the game developer community, and the works of walking simulators teased them out and brought them into focus. This is reflected in the origins of the genre as mods - Dear Esther and The Stanley Parable feature none of the combat or puzzle elements of Half-Life 2, and Gravity Bone has removed almost all identifiable features of Quake. As an equivalent, Gone Home's developers have stated that their game is an expansion on ideas they began exploring in their previous work for BioShock 2, yet Gone Home features none of the superpowered combat a player spends most of their play time performing in the BioShock games. Walking sims are a genre defined not by the creation of something new, but by the dramatic deconstruction of that which already exists.

So what is left, after this drastic simplification? Only the movement through a designed space, and the conveying of narrative. These elements that are taken for granted and made secondary in many games that walking sims take as influence are given primary focus in this genre. The environment, often treated as set dressing for the main action of game, is here made the focus, and the player's ability of make sense of that environment and intuit meaning from it through manual traversal is the primary form of interaction. The minimalist apprach also finds other game elements gaining increased importance. Though sound design, music, and voiceover are immportant components in many mainstream games, they are elevated to essential elements that wholly define the experience in many walking sims. The puzzles of Portal (also a Source engine game) could theoretically standalone without the persistent voice of GLaDOS, but Dear Esther and The Stanley Parable would be effectively nothing without their narrators. Similarly, finding bits of story and hints about lore within the environmental details of BioShock's Rapture is important to the tone of the game, but in Gone Home finding those details and understanding them is the main goal of play.

There is something quietly radical about this.

- Origin of term, once derisive, now simply descriptive of a loose genre

This writing marks the beginning of personal journey to understand the full scope of the walking simulator as a genre...
